# Chapter 2

## Sets, Functions, Sequences, Matrices

### Definition : 

A **set** is an unordered collection of objects, called elements or members. A set is said to *contain* its elements. 

$$a ∈ A \text{ (The element a, is within A) }$$

$$a ∉ A \text{ (The element a, is NOT within A) }$$

The **Roster method** of showing a set, lists all elements in the set with curly braces :

$$\{a, b, c, d\}$$

Set elements, do not need to be of the same type :

$$\{1, 2, Riley, a, Illinois\}$$

*Ellipses* (...) are commonly used to write sets using abbreviated roster method : 

$$\text{ Set of positive integers less than 100 : } \{1, 2, 3, ..., 98, 99\}$$

**Set builder** notation is also used to show a set with elements have a property pertaining them to the set : 

Take the set O, of all positive integers less than 10 : 

$$O = \{ x | x \text{ is an odd positive integer less than } 10 \}$$

Specifying the universe as the set of positive integers : 

$$O = \{x ∈ \mathbb{Z}^{+} | \text{ x is odd and } x < 10 \}$$

Set builder notation is often used to describe sets when it's impossible to list all the elements.

For instance, take the set $\mathbb{Q}^{+}$ of all positive rational numbers : 

$$\mathbb{Q}^{+} = \{x ∈ \mathbb{R}  \text{ | }x = \frac{p}{q}, \text{ for some positive integers p and q } \}$$


## important sets : 

$$\mathbb{N} = \{0, 1, 2, 3, ... \}, \text{ The set of natural numbers}$$

$$\mathbb{Z} = \{... , -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, ...\}, \text{ The set of integers }$$

$$\mathbb{Z}^{+} = \{1, 2, 3, ... \}, \text{ The set of positive integers}$$

$$\mathbb{Q} = \{ \frac{p}{q} \text{ | } p ∈ \mathbb{Z}, q ∈ \mathbb{Z}, \text{ and }q ≠ 0\}, \text{ The set of rational numbers}$$

$$\mathbb{R}, \text{ The set of real numbers }$$

$$\mathbb{R}^{+}, \text{ The set of positive real numbers }$$

$$\mathbb{C}, \text{ The set of complex numbers }$$

⋆ *Note* : some people do not consider 0 as a natural number.

---

Two sets are equal if and only if they have the same elements. 

A and B are equal sets iff : 

$$∀x(x ∈ A ↔ x ∈ B)$$

Then we can write A = B.

---
 
The empty set.

∅ 

Common error : 

The singleton set : { ∅ } is infact a set with one element (singleton) , the null set. 

---

Objects within sets, lead to paradoxes or logical inconsistencies.

These inconsistencies can be avoided by building set theory beginning with axioms.
 

Cantor's naive set theory is what we will study, however there is also axiomatic set theory which is more abstract.

---

Sets can be represented using Venn Diagrams 

The **Universal Set** *U* : contains all objects under consideration

## Subsets 

### Definition : 

The set A is a *subset* of B if and only if every element of A is also an element of B. We use the notation : 

$$A ⊆ B \text{ (A is a subset of B)}$$

$$∴ A ⊆ B ↔ ∀x(x ∈ A → x ∈ B)$$

### Theorem 1 :

For every set S,

$$∅ ⊆ S \text{ and } S ⊆ S$$

Every nonempty set S is guaranteed to have at least two subsets, the empty set and the set S itself.

For the empty set to be proven true the following logical proposition must be true: 

$$∀x(x ∈ ∅ → x ∈ S)$$

**Proper Subsets**, denoted : 
$$A ⊂ B$$

iff :

$$∀x(x ∈ A → x ∈ B) ∧ ∃x(x ∈ B ∧ x ∉ A)$$

If A and B are sets and we can prove 

$$A ⊆ B \text{ and } B ⊆ A$$

Then, we say $A = B$

$$A = B ⟺  ∀x(x ∈ A ↔ x ∈ B)$$

Sets may have other sets as members : 

$$A = \{∅, \{a\}, \{b\}, \{a, b\}\} \text{ and } B = \{ x \text{ | x is a subset of the set}\{a, b\}\}$$

$$∴ A = B$$

Note : $\{a\} ∈ A$ ∧  $a ∉ A$

---

### Size of set 

if there are exactly n, nonnegative distinct elements within a set then we call that set a finite set of cardinality n. Denoted : 

$$|S| = n$$

~*Cardinal numbers*

---

### Power sets

For problems involving testing all combinations of elements of a set to see if they satisfy a property. All such combinations, are considered by building a set of the subsets of the original set.

**Definition :** Given a set S, the *power set* of S is the set of all subsets of the set S. The power set of S is denoted :

$$P(S)$$

Example : 

$$P(\{0, 1, 2\}) \text{ is the set of all subsets of \{0, 1, 2\}}$$

$$P(\{0, 1, 2\}) = \{∅, \{0\}, \{1\}, \{2\}, \{0, 1\}, \{0, 2\}, \{1, 2\}, \{0, 1, 2\}\}$$

$P(\{∅\})$

$$= \{∅, \{∅\}\}$$

If a set has n elements, its power set has exactly $2^n$ elements. 

---

### Cartesian Products

Since sets are unordered, a different structure is needed to represent them. We use *ordered n-tuples* 

**Ordered n-tuple** $(a_1, a_2, ... , a_n)$ is the ordered collection that has $a_1$ as its first element and $a_n$ as the $n^{th}$.

Tuples are only considered equal when all of their ordered pairs are equal.

### Definition : 

Let A and B be sets. The cartesian product of A and B, denoted by $A × B$, is the set of all ordered pairs (a, b), where $a ∈ A$ and $b ∈ B$.

$$A × B = \{(a, b) \text{ | } a ∈ A ∧ b ∈ B\}$$

The *cartesian product* of the sets $A_1, A_2, ... , A_n$ denoted : $A_1 × A_2 ×  ... × A_n$


$$A_1 × A_2 ×  ... × A_n = \{(a_1, a_2, ..., a_n) \text{ | } a_i ∈ A_i \text{ for } i = 1, 2, ... , n \}$$

---

A subset R of the cartesian product $A × B$ is called a **relation** from the set A to the set B.

The elements of R are ordered pairs, where the first element 

Example :

What are the ordered pairs in the less than or equal to relation, which contains (a, b) if a ≤ b on the set {0, 1, 2, 3}?

> The ordered pair (a, b) belongs to R if and only if both a and b belong to {0, 1, 2, 3} and a ≤ b. Consequently, the ordered pairs in R are (0, 0), (0, 1), (0, 2), (0, 3), (1, 1), (1, 2), (1, 3), (2, 2), (2, 3), and (3, 3).

---

### Using set Notation with Quantifiers

$$∀x ∈ S(P(x)) \text{ is shorthand for } ∀x(x ∈ S → P(x))$$

$$∃x ∈ S(P(x)) \text{ is shorthand for } ∃x(x ∈ S ∧ P(x))$$

### Truth sets and Quantifiers

Set theory and predicate logic

**Truth set** of a predicate P, is the set of elements x in a domain D for which P(x) is true. The truth set of P(x) is denoted : 

$$\{x ∈ D \text{ | } P(x) \}$$
